PACHINKO
min Jin Lee
G
-
C
GRAND CENTRAL
PUBLISHING
NEW Y( )J{K I\USTl )N 
BOOK 1
Goh yang/ Hometown
1910-1933 
Home is a name, a word, it is a strong one; stronger
than magician ever spoke, or spirit answered to, in
strongest conjuration.
-Charles Dickens 
I
Y eongdo, Busan, Korea
History has failed us, but no matter.
At the turn of the century, an aging fisherman and his wife decided to
take in lodgers for extra money. Both were born and raised in the fishing
village ofYeongdo-a five-mile-wide islet beside the port city of Busan. In
their long marriage, the wife gave birth to three sons, but only Boonie,
the eldest and the weakest one, survived. Boonie was born with a cleft
palate and a twisted foot; he was, however, endowed with hefty shoulders,
a squat build, and a golden complexion. Even as a young man, he retained
the mild, thoughtful temperament he'd had as a child. When Boonie covered his misshapen mouth with his hands, something he did out of habit
meeting strangers, he resembled his nice-looking father, both having the
same large, smiling eyes. Inky eyebrows graced his broad forehead, perpetually tanned from outdoor work. Like his parents, Boonie was not a
nimble talker, and some made the mistake of thinking that because he
could not speak quickly there was something wrong with his mind, but
that was not true.
In 1910, when Boonie was twenty-seven years old, Japan annexed
Korea. The fisherman and his wife, thrifty and hardy peasants, refused to
be distracted by the country's incompetent aristocrats and corrupt rulers,
who had lost their nation to thieves. When the rent for their house was
raised again, the couple moved out of their bedroom and slept in the anteroom near the kitchen to increase the number oflodger s.
5 
Min Jin Lee
The wooden house they had rented for over three decades was not
1 · h f fi h ndred square feet. Sliding paper doors divided the arge,Just s y o ve u
· · · I g rooms and the fisherman himself had replaced mtenor mto t 1ree snu ,
· 1 ky f with reddish clay tiles to the benefit of his landlord, its ea grass roo .
who lived in splendor in a mansion in Busan. Eventually, the kitchen was
pushed out to the vegetable garden to make way for the larger cooking
pots and the growing number of portable dining tables that hung on pegs
along the mortared stone wall.
At his father's insistence, Hoonie learned to read and write Korean and
Japanese from the village schoolmaster well enough to keep a boardinghouse ledger and to do sums in his head so he couldn't be cheated at
the market. When he knew how to do this, his parents pulled him out of
school. As an adolescent, Hoonie worked nearly as well as a strong man
twice his age with two well-shaped legs; he was dexterous with his hands
and could carry heavy loads, but he could not run or walk quickly. Both
Hoonie and his father were known in the village for never picking up a cup
of wine. The fisherman and his wife raised their surviving son, the neighborhood cripple, to be clever and diligent, because they did not know
who would care for him after they died.
If it were possible for a man and his wife to share one heart, Hoonie was
this steady, beating organ. They had lost their other sons-the youngest
to measles and the middle, good-for-nothing one to a goring bull in a
pointless accident. Except for school and the market, the old couple kept
young Hoonie close by the house, and eventually, as a young man, Hoonie
needed to stay home to help his parents. They could not bear to disappoint him; yet they loved him enough not to dote on him. The peasants
knew that a spoiled son did more harm to a family than a dead one, and
they kept themselves from indulging him too much.
Other families in the land were not so fortunate as to have two such
sensible parents, and as happens in countries being pillaged by rivals or
nature, the weak- the elderly, widows and orphans - were as desperate as
ever on the colonized peninsula. For any household that could feed one
~ore, there were multitudes willing to work a full day for a bowl of barl ey
nee .
6 
e
PACHINKO
In the spring of 1911, two weeks after Hoonie turned twenty-eight, the
red-cheeked matchmaker from town called on his mother.
Hoonie's mother led the matchmaker to the kitchen; they had to speak
in low tones since the boarders were sleeping in the front rooms . It was
late morning , and the lodgers who'd fished through the evening had finished their hot suppers, washed up, and gone to bed . Hoonie's mother
poured the matchmaker a cup of cold barley tea but didn't break from her
own work.
Naturally, the mother guessed what the matchmaker wanted, but she
couldn't fathom what to say. Hoonie had never asked his parents for a
bride . It was unthinkable that a decent family would let their daughter
marry someone with deformities, since such things were inevitable in the
next generation . She had never seen her son talk to a girl; most village girls
avoided the sight of him, and Hoonie would have known enough not to
want something he could not have-this forbearance was something that
any normal peasant would have accepted about his life and what he was
allowed to desire .
The matchmaker's funny little face was puffy and pink; black flinty
eyes darted intelligently, and she was careful to say only nice things. The
woman licked her lips as if she was thirsty; Hoonie's mother felt the
woman observing her and every detail of the house, measuring the size of
the kitchen with her exacting eyes.
The matchmaker, however, would have had great difficulty in reading
Hoonie 's mother, a quiet woman who worked from waking until bed, doing what was needed for that day and the next. She rarely went to the market, because there was no time for distracting chatter; she sent Hoonie for
the shopping . While the matchmaker talked, Hoonie 's mother's mouth
remained unmoving and steady, much like the heavy pine table she was
cutting her radishes on.
The matchmaker brought it up first. So there was that unfortunate
matter of his foot and broken lip, but Hoonie was clearly a good boyeducated and strong as a pair of oxen! She was blessed to have such a
fine son, the matchmaker said. She deprecated her own childr en: Neither of her boys was dedicated to books or commerc e, but they were not
7 
Min]inLee
terrible boys. Her daughter married too early and lived too far away. All
good marriages, the matchmaker supposed, but her sons were lazy. Not
like Hoonie. After her speech, the matchmaker stared at the olive-skinned
woman whose face was immobile, casting about for any sign of interest.
Hoonie's mother kept her head down, handling her sharp knife confi.
dently-each cube of radish was square and certain. When a large mound
of white radish cubes formed on the cutting board, she transferred the
load in a clean swipe into a mixing bowl. She was paying such careful attention to the matchmaker's talking that privately, Hoonie's mother feared
she would begin to shake from nerves.
Before stepping into the house, the matchmaker had walked around
its perimeter to assess the financial condition of the household. From all
appearances, the neighborhood talk oftheir stable situation could be confirmed. In the kitchen garden, ponytail radishes, grown fat and heavy from
the early spring rain, were ready to be pulled from the brown earth. Pollack and squid strung neatly across a long dothesline dried in the lacy
spring sun. Beside the outhouse, three black pigs were kept in a clean
pen built from local stone and mortar. The matchmaker counted seven
chickens and a rooster in the backyard. Their prosperity was more evident inside the house.
In the kitchen, stacks of rice and soup howls rested on well-built shelves,
and braids of white garlic and red chilies hung from the low kitchen rafters.
In the comer, near the washbasin, there was an enormous woven basket
heaped with freshly dug potatoes. The comforting aroma of barley and millet steaming in the black rice pot wafted through the small house.
Satisfied with the boardinghouse's comfortable situation in a country
growing steadily poorer, the matchmaker was certain that even Hoonie
could have a healthy bride, so she plowed ahead.
The girl was from the other side of the island, beyond the dense woods.
Her father, a tenant farmer, was one of the many who'd lost his lease as
a result of the colonial government's recent land surveys. The widower,
cursed with four girls and no sons, had nothing to eat except for what was
gathered from the woods, fish he couldn't sell, or the occasional charity
from equally impoverished neighbors. The decent father had begged the
8 
>
PACHINKO
matchmaker to find grooms for his unmarried daughters, since it was better for virgins to marry anyone than to scrounge for food when men and
women were hungry, and virtue was expensive. The girl, Yangjin, was the
last of the four girls and the easiest to unload because she was too young
to complain, and she'd had the least to eat.
Yangjin was fifteen and mild and tender as a newborn calf, the matchmaker said. "No dowry, of course, and surely, the father could not expect
much in the way of gifts. Perhaps a few laying hens, cotton cloth for
Yangjin's sisters, six or seven sacks of millet to get them through the winter." Hearing no protest at the tally of gifts, the matchmaker grew bolder,
"Maybe a goat. Or a small pig. The family has so little, and bride prices
have come down so much. The girl wouldn't need any jewelry." The
matchmaker laughed a little.
With a flick of her thick wrist, Hoonie's mother showered the radish
with sea salt. The matchmaker could not have known how hard Hoonie's
mother was concentrating and thinking about what the woman wanted.
The mother would have given up anything to raise the bride price demanded; Hoonie's mother found herself surprised at the imaginings and
hopes rising within her breast, but her face remained collected and private; nevertheless, the matchmaker was no fool.
"What I wouldn't give to have a grandson of my own one day," the
matchmaker said, making her closing gambit while peering hard at the
boardinghouse keeper's creased, brown face. "I have a granddaughter but
no grandsons, and the girl cries too much."
The matchmaker continued. "I remember holding my first son when
he was a baby. How happy I was! He was as white as a basket of fresh rice
cakes on New Year's-soft and juicy as warm dough. Tasty enough to take
a bite. Well, now he's just a big dolt," feeling the need to add a complaint
to her bragging.
Hoonie's mother smiled, finally, because the image was almost too
vivid for her. What old woman didn't yearn to hold her grandson when
such a thought had been inconceivable before this visit? She clenched her
teeth to calm herself and picked up the mixing bowl. She shook it to even
out the salt.
9 
Min.Jin.Lee
''The girl has a nice face. No pockmarks. She's well mannered and
obeys her father and sisters. And not too dark. She's a little thing, but she
has strong hands and arms. She'll need to gain some weight, but you understand that. It's been a difficult time for the family." The matchmaker
smiled at the basket of potatoes in the corner as if to suggest that here, the
girl would be able to eat as much as she wanted .
Hoonie 's mother rested the bowl on the counter and turned to her
guest.
"I'll speak to my husband and son. There's no money for a goat or a
pig. We may be able to send some cotton wool with the other things for
the winter. I'll have to ask."
The bride and groom met on their wedding day, and Yangjin had not
been scared by his face. Three people in her village had been born that
way. She'd seen cattle and pigs with the same thing. A girl who lived near
her had a strawberry-like growth between her nose and split lip, and the
other children called her Strawberry, a name the girl did not mind. When
Yangjin's father had told her that her husband would be like Strawberry
but also with a crooked leg, she had not cried. He told her that she was a
good girl.
Hoonie and Yangjin were married so quietly that if the family had not
sent out mugwort cakes to the neighbors , they would have been accused
of stinginess . Even the boarders were astonished when the bride appeared
to serve the morning meal the day following the wedding.
When Yangjin became pregnant, she worried that her child would have
Hoonie's deformities. Her first child was born with a cleft palate but
had good legs. Hoon ie and his parents were not upset when the midwife
showed him to them. "Do you mind it?" Hoonie asked her, and she said
no, because she did not. When Yangjin was alone with her firstborn , she
traced her index finger around the infant's mouth and kissed it; she had
never loved anyone as much as her baby. At seven weeks, he died of a
fever. Her second baby had a perfect face and good legs, but he, too, died
before his baek-il celebration from diarrhea and fever. Her sisters, still unmarried , blamed her weak milk flow and advised her to see a shaman.
10
◄
-
PACHINKO
Hoonie and his parents did not approve of the shaman, but she went without telling them when she was pregnant for the third time. Yet in the midst
of her third pregnancy, she felt odd, and Yangjin resigned herself to the
possibility that this one, too, may die. She lost her third to smallpox.
Her mother-in-law went to the herbalist and brewed her healing teas.
Yangjin drank every brown drop in the cup and apologized for the great
expense. After each birth, Hoonie went to the market to buy his wife
choice seaweed for soup to heal her womb; after each death, he brought
her sweet rice cakes still warm from the market and gave them to her: "You
have to eat. You must get your strength."
Three years after the marriage, Hoonie's father died, then months after,
his wife followed. Yangjin's in-laws had never denied her meals or clothing. No one had hit her or criticized her even as she failed to give them a
surviving heir.
At last, Yangjin gave birth to Sunja, her fourth child and the only girl,
and the child thrived; after she turned three, the parents were able to sleep
through the night without checking the pallet repeatedly to see if the small
form lying beside them was still breathing. Hoonie made his daughter dollies out of corn husks and forsook his tobacco to buy her sweets; the three
ate each meal together even though the lodgers wanted Hoonie to eat with
them. He loved his child the way his parents had loved him, but he found
that he could not deny her anything. Sunja was a normal-looking girl with
a quick laugh and bright, but to her father, she was a beauty, and he marveled at her perfection. Few fathers in the world treasured their daughters
as much as Hoonie, who seemed to live to make his child smile.
In the winter when Sunja was thirteen years old, Hoonie died quietly
from tuberculosis. At his burial, Yangjin and her daughter were inconsolable. The next morning, the young widow rose from her pallet and
returned to work.
11 
Boo K 1 1
Motherland 
I thought that no matter how many hills and brooks
you crossed, the whole world was Korea and everyone in it was Korean.
-Park Wan-suh 
2
Each morning, Sunja walked to the police station and handed over
three onigi,n made with barley and millet. If there was money in the budget
for a chicken egg, she'd hard-boil it, soak the peeled egg in vinegary shoyu
to supplement Isak's modest bento. No one could be sure if the food
ever reached him, but she couldn't prove that it didn't. Everyone in the
neighborhood knew someone who'd gone to jail, and the wildly varying reports were at best troubling and at worst terrifying. Yoseb wouldn't
speak about Isak, hut Isak's arrest had altered him considerably. Patches
of gray smudged his once jet-black hair, and he suffered from intense
stomach cramps. He stopped writing to his parents, who couldn't be told
about Isak, so Kyunghee wrote to them instead, making excuses. At meals,
Yoseb put aside much of his food for Noa who sat beside him quietly.
' Yoseb and Noa shared a kind of unspeakable grief over Isak's absence.
Despite numerous personal appeals, no one had been allowed to see
Isak, but the family believed he was alive, because the police had not told
them otherwise Th. Id . . . d · · ail as
· e e er m1mster and the sexton remame m J
well, a
nd the family hoped that the three of them sustained each otber
somehow, though n kn . . h ed, A
d
O one ew how the pnsoners were bemg ous
ay after the arrest th li Isak's £ b ' e po ce had come to the house to confiscate
ew ooks and papers Th r. il ' nitored; d . . . · e 1
am Y s comings and goings were rno . a etective VIs1ted the r Th police
P
adl k d h m every iew weeks to ask questions. e . . oc e t e church h retlY 111 ' yet t e congregation continued to meet sec
160 
-- PACHINKO
all groups led by the church elders . Kyunghee, Sunja, and Yoseb never
srn . c f . h
tlle parishioners for 1ear o putting t em in danger. By now, most of
met
the foreign missionaries back home and here had returned to their native
countries. It was rare to see a white person in Osaka. Yoseb had written
the Canadian missionaries about Isak but there'd been no reply.
Under considerable duress, the decision -making authority of the Presbyterian Church had deemed that the mandatory Shinto shrine ceremony
was a civic duty rather than a religious one even though the Emperor,
the head of the state religion, was viewed as a living deity. Pastor Yoo,
a faithful and pragmatic minister, had believed that the shrine ceremony,
where the townspeople were required to gather and perform rites, was in
fact a pagan ritual drummed up to rouse national feeling. Bowing to idols
was naturally offensive to the Lord. Nevertheless, Pastor Yoo had encouraged Isak, Hu, and his congregation to observe the Shinto bowing for the
greater good . He didn't want his parishioners, many of them new to the
faith, to be sacrificed to the government's predictable response to disobedience-prison and death. Pastor Yoo found support for such ideas in the
letters of the apostle Paul . So whenever these gatherings at the nearest
shrine took place, their frequency varying from town to town, the elder
pastor, Isak, and Hu had attended when necessary along with whoever
else was in the church building at the time . However, with his weakened
vision, the elder pastor had not known that at every Shinto ceremony, the
sexton Hu had been mouthing Our Father like an unbroken loop even as
he bowed, sprinkled water, and clapped his hands like all the others . Isak
had noticed Hu doing this, of course, but had said nothing. If anything,
Isak had admired Hu's faith and gesture ofresistance.
For Suaja, Isak's arrest had forced her to consider what would happen if
the unthinkable occurred. Would Yoseb ask her and her children to leave?
Where would she go, and how would she get there? How would she take
care of her children:) Kyunghee would not ask her to leave, but even soshe was only a wife. Surtia had to have a plan and money in case she had
to retur l l • n 1ome to 1er mother with her sons.
So Sm1ja ha<l to find work. She would become a peddler. It was one
l(i] 
Min Jin Lee
thing for a woman like her mother to take in ~oarders and to _work alongside her husband to earn money, but somethmg altogether different for a
young woman to stand in an open ~arket an~ sell food to str~ngers, shouting until she was hoarse. Yoseb tned to forbid. her from gettmg a job, hut
she could not listen to him. With tears streammg down her face, she told
her brother-in-law that Isak would want her to earn money for the boys'
schooling . To this, Yoseb yielded. Nevertheless, he prohibited Kyunghee
from working outdoors, and his wife obeyed. Kyunghee was allowed to
put up the pickles with Sunja, but she couldn't sell them. Yoseb couldn't
protest too much, because the household was desperate for cash. In a way,
the two women tried to obey Yoseb in their disobedience-they did not
want to hurt Yoseb by defying him, but the financial burdens had become
impossible for one man to bear alone .
Her first day of selling took place one week after Isak was jailed. After
Sunja dropped off Isak's food at the jail, she wheeled a wooden cart holding a large clay jar ofkimchi to the market. The open-air market in Ikaino
was a patchwork of modest retail shops selling housewares, cloth, tatami
mats, and electric goods, and it hosted a collection of hawkers like her
who pe~dled homemade scallion pancakes, rolled sushi, and soybean
paste.
Kyunghee watched Mozasu at home. Nearby the peddlers selling
gochujang and doenjang, Sunja noticed two young Korean women selling
fried wheat crackers. Sunja pushed her cart toward them, hoping to
wedge herself between the cracker stall and the soybean-paste lady.
"You can't stink up our area," the older of the two cracker sellers said.
''Go to the other side." She pointed to the fish section.
When Sunja moved closer to the women selling dried anchovies and
seaweed, the older Korean women there were even less welcoming.
"If you don't move your shitty-looking cart, I'll have my sons piss in
your pot. Do you understand, country girl?" said a tall woman wearing a
white kerchief on her head .
Sunja couldn't come up with a reply, because she was so surprised,
None of them were even selling kimchi, and doenjang could smell ju st as
pungently.
162 
PACHINKO
S11e kept walking until she couldn't see any more a · d d d ')Ummas an en e
iear the train station entrance where the live chick ld Th
up 1 , • ens were so . e
. 15e funk of ammal carcasses overwhelmed her Th b. 1nte1 · ere was a space 1g
ough for her cart between the pig butcher and the chick en ens.
\Vielding an _enormous knife, a Japanese butcher was cutting up a hog
tl1e size of a child . A large bucket filled with its blood rested by his feet.
Two hogs' heads lay on the front table. The butcher was an older gentleman \\~th ropy, muscular arms and thick veins. He was sweating profusely,
and he smiled at her.
Sunja parked her cart in the empty lot by his stall. Whenever a train
stopped, she could feel its deceleration beneath her sandals. Passengers
would disembark, and many of them came into the market from the entrance nearby, but none stopped in front of her cart. Suaja tried not to
cry. Her breasts were heavy with milk, and she missed being at home with
Kyunghee and Mozasu . She wiped her face with her sleeves, trying to remember what the best market ajummas would do back home.
•;Kimchi! Delicious kimchi! Try this delicious kimchi, and never make
it at home again!" she shouted. Passersby turned to look at her, and Sunja,
mortified, looked away from them. No one bought anything. After the
butcher finished with his hog, he washed his hands and gave her twentyfive sen, and Sunja filled a container for him. He didn't seem to mind that
she didn't speak Japanese. He put down the kimchi container by the hogs'
heads, then reached behind his stall to take out his bento. The butcher
placed a piece of kimchi neatly on top of his white rice with his chopsticks
and ate a bite of rice and kimchi in front of her.
"Oishi! Oishi nee! Honto oishi," he said, smiling.
She bowed to him.
At lunchtime, Kyunghee brought Mozasu for her to nurse, and Sunja
remembered that she had no choice but to recoup the cost of the cabbage,
radish, and spices. At the end of the day, she had to show more money
than they had spent.
Kyunghee watched the cart while Sunja nursed the baby with her bod y
turned toward the wall.
-~rd be afraidt Kyunghee said. •·You know how I'd said that I wanted
163 
Min Jin Lee
to be a kimchi ajumma? I don't think I realized what it Id
wou feel l'k
stand here. You're so brave." 1
e to
"What choice do we have?" Sunja said, looking down th
baby. a er beautiful
""Do you want me to stay here? And wait with you?"
""You'll get in trouble ," Sunja said . "'You should be h h
ome w en Noa
gets back from school, and you have to make dinner I'm so I . rry can't hel
you , Sister." p
"What I have to do is easy," Kyunghee said.
It ~as almost two o'clock in the afternoon, and the air felt cooler as the
sun turned away from them .
"I' m not gomg . h to come ome until I sell the whole jar."
"'Really?"
Su~ja nodded. Her baby, Mozasu, resembled Isak. He looked nothing
like Noa , who was olive-skinned with thick, glossy hair. Noa's bright eyes
noticed everything . Except for his mouth, Noa looked almost identical to
a young Hansu . At school, Noa sat still during lessons, waited for his tum,
and he was praised as an excellent student. Noa had been an easy baby,
and Mozasu was a happy baby, too, delighted to be put into a stranger's
arms . When she thought about how much she loved her boys, she recalled
her parents . Sunja felt so far away from her mother and father. Now she
was standing outside a rumbling train station, trying to sell kimchi. There
was no shame in her work, but it couldn't be what they'd wanted for her.
Nevertheless, she felt her parents would have wanted her to make money,
especially now.
When Sunja finished nursing, Kyunghee put down two sugared rolls
and a bottle filled with reconstituted powdered milk on the cart. . . , 'ght? You "'You have to eat, SunJa. You're nursmg, and thats not easy, n
have to drink lots of water and milk."
· t the sling on Kyunghee turned around so Sunja could tuck Mozasu m 0
. htl d her torso. Kyunghee's back. Kyunghee secured the baby ttg y aroun . . " e home soon, "I'll go home and wait for Noa and make dmner. 1ou com
okay? We're a good team ." bl des
h , . ti ·n shoulder a ' Mozasu's small head rested between Kyung ee s 11
164 
""PACHINKO
d Sunja watched them walk away. When they were out of earshot, Sunja
a~ d ut "Kimchi! Delicious Kimchi! Kimchi! Delicious kimchi! Oishi
cne o '
de , Oishi kimchi!" :5U,.
This sound, the sound of her own voice, felt familiar, not because it
was her own voice but because it reminded her of all the times she'd gone
to the market as a girl-first with her father, later by herself as a young
woman, then as a lover yearning for the gaze of her beloved. The choius of women hawking had always been with her, and now she'd joined
them. "Kimchi! Kimchi! Homemade kimchi! The most delicious kimchi
in Ikaino! More tasty than your grandmother's! Oishi desu, oishi!" She
tried to sound cheerful, because hack home, she had always frequented
the nicest ajummas. When the passersby glanced in her direction, she
bowed and smiled at them . "Oishi! Oishi!"
The pig butcher looked up from his counter and smiled at her proudly.
That evening, Sunja did not go home until she could see the bottom of
the kimchi jar.
Sunja could sell whatever kimchi she and Kyunghee were able to make
now, and this ability to sell had given her a kind of strength. If they
could've made more kimchi, she felt sure that she could've sold that, too,
but fermenting took time, and it wasn't always possible to find the right
ingredients. Even when they made a decent profit, the price of cabbages
could spike the following week, or worse, they might not be available
at all. When there were no cabbages at the market, the women pickled
radishes, cucumbers, garlic, or chives, and sometimes Kyunghee pickled
carrots or eggplant without garlic or chili paste, because the Japanese preferred those kinds of pickles. Suaja thought about land all the time. The
little kitchen garden her mother had kept behind the house had nourished
them even when the boardinghouse guests ate double what they paid.
The price of fresh food kept rising , and working p eople couldn't afford
th
e most basic things. Recently, some customers would ask to buy a cup
ofkimchi because they couldn't afford a jar of it.
If Suaja had no kimchi or pickles to sell, she sold other things . Surtia
roa1.,t
ed sweet potatoes and chestnuts; sh e boiled ears of corn. She had
165
-
Min Jin Lee
two carts now. and she hooked them together like the cars of at . ' r~none cart with a 111akeshift coal stove and another just for pickles. The
carts took up the better part of the kitch~n because they had to keep
them inside the house for fear of them getting stolen. She split the p f ro .
its equally with Kyunghee, and Sunja put aside every sen she could for
the boys' schooling and for their passage hack home in case they had to
leave.
When Mozasu turned five months old, Sunja also started selling candy
at the n1arket. Produce had been getting increasingly scarce, and by
chance, Kyunghee had obtained two wholesale bags of black sugar from a
Korean grocer whose Japanese brother-in-law worked in the military.
At her usual spot by the pork butcher's stall, Sunja stoked the fire beneath the metal bowl used to melt sugar. The steel box that functioned as
a stove had been giving her trouble; as soon as she could afford it, Suaja
planned on having a proper stove made up for her cart. She rolled up her
sleeves and moved the live coals around to circulate the air and raise the
heat.
''Agasshi, do you have kimchi today?"
It was a man's voice, and Sunja looked up. About Isak's age, he dressed
like her brother-in-law - tidy without drawing much attention to himself.
His face was cleanly shaven, and his fingernails were neat. The lenses of
his eyeglasses were very thick and the heavy frames detracted from his
good features.
"No, sir. No kimchi today. Just candy. It's not ready, though."
"Oh. When will you have kimchi again?"
"Hard to say. There isn't much cabbage to buy, and the last batch of
kimchi we put up isn't ready yet," Sunja said, and returned to the coals.
"A day or two? A week?"
Sunja looked up again, surprised by his insistence. .
"The kimchi might be ready in three days or so. If the weather contl~~
ues to get warmer, then it might be two, sir. But I don't think that so~n,
Sunja said flatly, hoping he would let her start with the candy rnakin~- . ff the tra1u Sometimes, she sold a few bags to the young women getting 0
at about this time.
7 ·,; 
PACHINKO
·•f-loW much kimchi will you have when it's ready?"
I'll have plenty to sell you . Do you know how much .,. ·· . . . · you want!' Most . . ustomers hke to bnng their own containers H h
0 t nn c · ow muc do you . k, ,ou need?" Her customers were Korean women wh k d . f: t111n ). 0 wor e m ac- . and didn't have time to make their own banchan Wh h
woes 1 · en s e so d
ts her customers were children and young women "'u t t b . 5wee , . • J s s op y m
h days and if you brmg your own container-" t ree ,
The young man laughed.
"Well, I was thinking that maybe you can sell me everything you make."
He adjusted his eyeglasses.
,1y0 u can't eat that much kimchi! And how would you keep the rest of
it fresh?" Sunja replied, shaking her head at his foolishness. "It's going to
be summer in a couple of months, and it's hot here already."
"I'm sorry. I should have explained. My name is Kim Changho, and I
manage the yakiniku restaurant right by Tsuruhashi Station. News of your
excellent kimchi has spread far."
Sunja wiped her hands on the apron that she wore over her padded
cotton vest, keeping a close eye on the hot coals.
"It's my sister-in -law who knows what she's doing in the kitchen. I just
sell it and help her make it."
"Yes, yes, I'd heard that, too. Well, I'm looking for some women to
make all the kimchi and banchan for the restaurant. I can get you cabbage
and- "
"Where, sir? Where do you get cabbage? We looked everywhere. My
sister-in-law goes to the market early in the morning and still-"
"I can get it," he said, smiling.
Sunja didn't know what to say. The candy-making metal bowl was hot
already, and it was time to put in the sugar and water, but she didn't want
to start now. If this person was serious, then it was important to hear him
out. She heard the train arrive . She had missed her first hatch of customers already.
"Wh ere's your restaurant again?"
''It'· th b" • b h" d the train station. On 8 e 1g restaurant on the side street e m
the sa h wned by the skinny me street as the pharmacy-you know, t e one 0
167
---
Min Jin Lee
Japanese pharmacist, Okada-san? He wears black glasses like mine?" He
pushed his glasses up on his nose again and smiled like a boy.
h . " "Oh, I know where the p annacy 1s.
This was the shop where all the Koreans went when they were really
sick and were willing to pay for good medicine. Okada was ~ot a friendly
man, but he was honest; he was reputed to be able to cure many ailments.
The young man didn't seem like anyone who was trying to take advantage of her, but she couldn't be sure. In the few short months working as
a vendor, she'd given credit to a few customers and had not been repaid.
People were willing to lie about small things and to disregard your interests.
Kim Changho gave her a business card . "Here's the address. Can you
bring your kimchi when it's done? Bring all of it. I'll pay you in cash, and
I'll get you more cabbage."
Sunja nodded , not saying anything. If she had only one customer for
the kimchi, then she'd have more time to make other things to sell. The
hardest part had been procuring the cabbage, so if this man could do that,
then the work would be much easier. Kyunghee had been scouring the
market with Mozasu on her back to track down these scarce ingredients
and often returned home with a light market basket. Sunja promised to
bring him what she had.
The restaurant was the largest storefront on the short side street parallel
to the train station . Unlike the other businesses nearby, its sign was lettered handsomely by a professional sign maker. The two women admired
the large black letters carved and painted into a vast wooden plaque. They
wondered what the words meant. It was obviously a Koreangalbi housethe scent of grilled meat could be detected from two blocks away-but the
sign had difficultjapanese lettering that neither of them could read. Sunja
grasped the handlebar of the carts loaded with all the kimchi they'd put
up in the past few weeks and took a deep breath. If the kimchi sales to
the restaurant were steady, they'd have a regular income . She could buy
eggs more often for Isak's and Noa 's meals and get heavy wool cloth for
Kyunghee, who wanted to sew new coats for Yoseb and Noa .
168 
4
May 1942
Noa Baek was not like the other eight-year-olds in the neighborhood.
Each morning before he went to school, he'd scrub his face until his
cheeks were pink, smooth three drops of oil on his black hair, then comb it
away from his forehead as his mother had taught him to do. After a breakfast of barley porridge and miso soup, he'd rinse his mouth and check his
white teeth in the small round hand mirror by the sink. No matter how
tired his mother was, she made certain that Noa's shirts were ironed the
night before. In his clean, pressed clothes, Noa looked like a middle-class
Japanese child from a wealthier part of town, bearing no resemblance to
the unwashed ghetto children outside his door.
At school, Noa was strong in both arithmetic and writing, and he Surprised the gym teacher with his adept hand-eye coordination and running
speed. After classes ended, he tidied the shelves and swept the classroom
floors without being asked and walked home alone, trying not to draw
any undue attention to himself. The boy managed to look unafraid_ of th.e
tough h'ld . h 'meter of qmet pn- er c 1 ren while setting himself apart wit a pen
vacy th h Noa went directly . at could not be disturbed. When he got ome, . Into th h . 1
. • . the street with
e ouse to do his schoolwork without mgenng on
the · · neighborhood children who played until dinnertmie. h
Wh h' • h' king business to t e
en 1s mother and aunt moved the kimc i-ma . bba ·e
restaur l l offermenung ca 'g ant, the house no longer smelled relent ess Y . I · . and p' kl ll d ·arlic turd. If anyt ung, ic es. Noa hoped he'd no longer be ca .e g
179
-
Min Jin Lee
lately, their house smelled less of cooking than the others in the neighborhood, because his mother and aunt brought home cooked food from the
restaurant for their family meals. Once a week, Noa got to eat tidbits of
grilled meat and white rice from the restaurant.
Like all children, Noa kept secrets, but his were not ordinary ones.
At school, he went by his Japanese name, Nobuo Boku, rather than Noa
Baek; and though everyone in his class knew he was Korean from his Japanized surname, ifhe met anyone who didn't know this fact, Noa wasn't
forthcoming about this detail. He spoke and wrote better Japanese than
most native children . In class, he dreaded the mention of the peninsula
where his parents were born and would look down at his papers if the
teacher mentioned anything about the colony of Korea. Noa's other secret: His father, a Protestant minister, was injail and had not been home
in over two years.
The boy tried to remember his father's face, but couldn't. When asked
to tell family stories for class assignments, Noa would say that his father
worked as a foreman at a. biscuit factory, and if some children inferred that
Uncle Yoseb was his father, Noa didn't correct them. The big secret that
he kept from his mother, aunt, and even his beloved uncle was that Noa
did not believe in God anymore. God had allowed his gentle, kindhearted
father to go to jail even though he had done nothing wrong. For two years,
God had not answered Noa's prayers, though his father had promised
him that God listens very carefully to the prayers of children. Above all the
other secrets that Noa could not speak of, the boy wanted to be Japanese;
it was his dream to leave lkaino and never to return.
It was a late spring afternoon; Noa returned home from school and fouud
his snack, left out by his mother before she went to work, waiting for hil11
on the low table where the family ate their meals and where Noa did his
homework. Thirsty, he went to the kitchen to get some water, and when
he returned to the front room, he screamed . Near the door, there was a
gaunt and filthy man collapsed on the floor .
. Unable to rise, the man leaned the weight of his torso on the crook of
his left elbow and tried to push up to sitting, but couldn 't manage it.
180 
PACHINKO
. ? N Should he scream agam. oa wondered. Who would help him? His
mother, aunt, and uncle were at work, and no one had heard him the
first time. The beggar didn't seem dangerous; he looked ill and dirty, but
he could've been a thief, too. Uncle had warned Noa about burglars and
. thieves who could break into the house looking for food or valuables. He
i had fifty sen in his trouser pocket; he'd been saving it for an illustrated
book on archery.
The man was sobbing now, and Noa felt bad for him. There were many
poor people on his street, but no one looked as bad as this man. The
beggar's face was covered with sores and black scabs. Noa reached into
his pocket and pulled out the coin. Afraid that the man might grab his
leg, Noa stepped just close enough to place the coin on the floor near the
man's hand. Noa planned to walk backward to the kitchen and run out the
back door to get help, but the man's crying made him pause.
The boy looked carefully at the man's gray-bearded face. His clothes
were torn and grimy but the shape of them resembled the dark suits that
his principal at school wore.
"It's appa," the man said.
Noa gasped and shook his head no.
"Where's your mother, child?"
It was his voice. Noa took a step forward.
"Umma's at the restaurant," Noa replied.
"Where?"
Isak was confused.
"I'll go now. I'll get umma. Are you okay?" The boy didn't know what
to do exactly. He was still a bit afraid, though it was certainly his father.
The gentle eyes beneath the jutting cheekbones and scaly skin were the
same. Perhaps his father was hungry. His shoulder bones and elbows
looked like sharp tree branches beneath his clothing. ~-Do you want to eat
something, appa ?"
Noa pointed to the snack his mother had left for him: two rice halls
made from barley and millet.
Isak shook his head, smiling at the boy's concern.
"A ga-can you get me some water?"
181 
Min Jin Lee
When Noa returned with the cup of cold water from the kitchen, he
found his father slumped to the ground with his eyes closed .
"Appa! Appa! Wake up! I have your water! Drink your water, appa,"
Noa cried.
Isak's eyes fluttered open; he smiled at the sight of the boy.
"Appa is tired, Noa. Appa is going to sleep."
"Appa, drink your water." The boy held out the cup .
Isak raised his head and took a long drink, then closed his eyes again.
Noa bent over, close to his father's mouth, to check his breathing. He
retrieved his own pillow and tucked it beneath Isak's bushy gray head. He
~ covered him with the heavy quilt and closed the front door behind him
quietly. Noa ran to the restaurant as fast as he could .
He burst into the dining room, but no one in the front area noticed him.
None of the grown men working there minded the well-mannered boy
who never said much beyond yes and no. The toddler, Mozasu, was
sleeping in the storage room; when awake, the two-year-old tore through
the dining room, but asleep, he looked like a statue of an angel. The
manager, Kirn, never complained about Sunja's children. He bought toys
and comic books for the boys and occasionally watched Mozasu while he
worked in the back office.
"Uh-muh ." Kyunghee looked up from her work, alarmed at the sight of
Noa, breathless and pale, in the kitchen . "You're sweating. Are you okay?
We'll be done soon. Are you hungry?" She got up from her crouching position to fix him something to eat, thinking he'd come by because he was
lonesome .
''Appa came home . He looks sick. He's sleeping on the floor at home."
Suaja, who'd been quiet, waiting for Noa to speak up, wiped her wet
hands on her apron . "Can I go? Can we leave now? " She'd never left early
before .
"I'll stay here and finish. You go. Hurry . I'll be right there after I'm
done ."
Sunja reached for Noa's hand.
* * *
182 
Halfway down the street , Sunja shouted, ''Mozasu!" and Noa looked up
at her.
··Umma, Aunt will bring him home," he said calmly.
She clutched his hand tighter and walked briskly toward the house.
··You ease my mind , Noa. You ease my mind."
V\"ithout the others around, it was possible to be kind to her son. Parents weren :t supposed to praise their children, she knew this-it would
onlv invite disaster . But her father had always told her when she had done
something well; out of habit , he would touch the crown of her head or
pat her back, even when she did nothing at all. Any other parent might've
been chided by the neighbors for spoiling a daughter, but no one said
an~ thing to her crippled father, who marveled at his child's symmetrical
features and normal limbs. He. took pleasure in just watching her walk,
talk, and do simple sums in her head. Now that he was gone, Sunja held
on to her father's warmth and kind words like polished gems. No one
should expect praise, and certainly not a woman, but as a little girl, she'd
been treasured , nothing less. She 'd been her father's delight. She wanted
Noa to know what that was like, and she thanked God with every bit of her
being for her boys. On the days when it felt impossible to live another day
in her husband 's brother's house-to work through the whole day and
night, then to wake up again before the sun to start again, to go to the jail
and hand over a meal for her husband-Sunja thought of her father, who
had never said a cross word to her. He had taught her that children were a
delight, that her boys were her delight.
'•Did appa look very ill?" Sunja asked.
·I didn 't know it was him. Appa was usually so clean and nicely
dressed, nee?"
Sunja nodded, having told herself long ago to expect the worst. The
elders in her church had warned her that the Korean prisoners were usually sent home just as they were about to die , so that tl1ey would not die in
jail. The prisoners were beaten, starved, and made to go without clothing
t~ weaken them. Just that morning, Sunja had gone to the jail to drop off
his meal and this week's clean set of undershirts . Brother had been right
then; her husband must not have received any of these things . As she allcl
183 
Min Jin Lee
Noa walked down the busy street, oblivious to the crowds, it occurred to
her that she'd never thought to prepare her son for Isak's return. If anything, she had been so busy preparing for his death by ~orkin~ and saving
money that she had not thought about what the boy rmght think of his father's return, or worse, his death. She felt so sorry for not having told him
what to expect. It must have been a terrible shock for Noa.
"Did you eat your snack today?" she asked him, not knowing what else
to say.
"I left it for a,ppa."
They passed a small throng of uniformed students streaming out of a
confectionery, eating their treats happily. Noa looked down, but didn't let
go of his mother's hand. He knew the children, but none were his friends.
"Do you have homework?"
"Yes, but I'll do it when I get home, umma."
"You never give me any trouble," she said, feeling his five perfect fingers in hers, and she felt grateful for his sturdiness.
Sunja opened the door slowly. Isak was on the floor, sleeping. She knelt
by his head. Dark, mottled skin stretched across his eye sockets and high
cheekbones. His hair and beard were nearly white; he looked years older
than his brother, Yoseb. He was no longer the beautiful young man who
had rescued her from disgrace. Sunja removed his shoes and peeled off
his holey socks. Dried crusts of blood covered his cracked, raw soles. The
last toe on his left foot had turned black.
"Umma," Noa said.
"Yes." She turned to him.
"Should I get Uncle?"
"Yes." She nodded, trying not to cry. "Shimamura-san may not let him
leave early, Noa. If Uncle can't leave, tell him that I'm with him. We don't
want Uncle to get in trouble at work. Okay?"
Noa ran out of the house, not bothering to slide the door fully shut, and
the incoming breeze woke Isak; he opened his eyes to see his wife sitting
next to him.
"Yoho," he said.
184 
PACHINKO
Sunja nodded . ""You're home . We're so glad you're h ,, . ome.
He smjled . The once-straight white teeth were either black or missing- the lower set cracked off entirely.
•You've suffered so much."
-·The sexton and the pastor died yesterday. I should've died a long time
ago?
Sunja shook her head, unable to speak.
••I'm home . Every day, I imagined this. Every minute. Maybe that's why
I am here . How hard it must have been for you," he said, looking at her
kindly.
Sur~a shook her head no, wiping her face with her sleeve.
The Korean and Chinese girls who worked at the factory smiled at
the sight of Noa. The delicious scent of freshly baked wheat biscuits
greeted him. A girl packing biscuit boxes near the door whispered in
Korean how tall he was getting. She pointed to his uncle's back. He was
crouched over the motor of the biscuit machine. The factory floor was
long and narrow, designed like a wide tunnel for the easy inspection of
workers; the owner had set up the imposing biscuit machine by his office with the conveyor belts moving toward the workers, who stood in
parallel rows. Yoseb wore safety goggles and was poking about inside
the service panel with a pair of pliers. He was the foreman and the factory mechanic.
The din of the heavy machine blocked out normal speaking voices.
The girls weren't supposed to talk on the factory floor, but it was nearly
impossible to catch them if they whispered and made minimal facial
gestures. Forty unmarried girls, hired for their nimble fingers and general tidiness, packed twenty thin wheat biscuits into wooden boxes that
would be shipped to army officers stationed in China. For every two
broken biscuits, a girl was fined a sen from her wages, forcing her to
Work carefully as well as swiftly. If she ate even a broken corner of a
biscuit, she'd be terminated immediately. At the end of the day, the
youngest girl gathered the broken biscuits into a fabric-lined basket,
packed them into small bags, and was sent out to the market to sell
185 
Min Jin Lee
them at a discount. If they didn't sell, Shimamura sold the biscuits for
a nominal amount to the girls who packed the most boxes without error. Yoseb never took broken biscuits home, because the girls made so
little money, and even the biscuit crumbs meant so much to them.
Shimamura, the owner, was sitting in his glassed-in office, the size
of a utility closet. The plate glass window allowed him to check the
girls' work. If he found anything amiss, he'd call Yoseb in and tell him
to give the girl a warning. On the second warning, the girl was sent
home without pay even if she'd worked for six days. Shimamura kept
a blue, cloth-bound ledger with warnings listed next to the names of
the girls, written in his beautiful hand-lettering . His foreman, Yoseb,
disliked punishing the girls, and Shimamura viewed this as yet another
example of Korean weakness. The factory owner believed that if all
Asian countries were run with a kind of Japanese efficiency, attention
to detail, and high level of organization, Asia as a whole would prosper
and rise-able to defeat the unscrupulous West. Shimamura believed he
was a fair person with perhaps a too-soft heart, which explained why he
hired foreigners when many of his friends wouldn't. When they pointed
to the slovenly nature of foreigners, he argued how could the foreigners
ever learn unless the Japanese taught them to loathe incompetence and
sloth . Shimamura felt that standards must be maintained for posterity's
sake.
Noa had been inside the factory only once, and Shimamura had not
been pleased then. About a year ago, Kyunghee was sick with a high fever
and had fainted in the market, and Noa was sent to fetch Yoseb. Shimamura had reluctantly allowed Yoseb to attend to his wife. The next
morning, he explained to Yoseb that there would be no repeat of tl1is incident . How could he, Shimamura asked, run two machine-based factories
without the presence of a competent mechanic? IfYoseb's wife were to get
sick again, she would have to rely on a neighbor or family member; Yoseb
could not just leave the factory in the middle of the day. The biscuits were
war orders, and they had to be met promptly. Men were risking their lives
fighting for their country ; each family must make sacrifices.
So when Shimamura spotted the boy again, only a year after that uu186 
PACHINKO
c.ortable speech that he had not wanted to make h fu . con111 , e was nous . He
Pped open his newspaper, pretending not to see the b t • hi
sna oy appmg s
le's lower back.
unc
Yoseb, startled by Noa's light touch, turned around.
"Uh-muh, Noa, what are you doing here?"
''Appa's home ."
"Really?"
"Can you come home now?" Noa asked. His mouth made a small red O.
Yoseb removed his goggles and sighed.
Noa closed his mouth and looked down. His uncle would have to get
permission, the way his mother had to ask Aunt Kyunghee or Mr. Kimthe same way he had to ask his teacher to go to the bathroom. Sometimes,
when it was sunny outside, Noa dreamed of not telling anyone and going
to Osaka Bay. He'd been there once with his father on a Saturday afternoon when he was very small, and he always thought it would be nice to
go back.
"Is he all right?" Yoseb studied Noa's expression.
"Appa's hair turned gray. He's very dirty. Umma's with him. She said if
you can't come, it's okay, but she wanted you to know. To know that a,ppa
is home now."
"Yes, that's right. I'm glad to know."
Yoseb glanced at Shimamura, who was holding up his newspaper, pretending to read, but was no doubt watching him very carefully. His boss
would never allow him to go home now. Also, unlike when Kyunghee
fainted, Shimamura knew Isak had gone to jail because the sexton had refused to observe the Shinto ceremony. Periodically, the police came by to
question Yoseb as well as to speak with Shimamura, who defended Yoseb
as a model Korean . If he left, Yoseb would lose his job, and if the police
picked him up for questioning, he would lose his character reference.
"Listen, Noa, work will be done in less than three hours, and then afterwards, I'll hurry home. It's irresponsible for me to leave now without
finishing my work. As soon as I'm done, I'll nm home faster than you can
run. Tell your umma that I'll come home right away. And if your appa
asks, tell him that Brother will be there very soon."
187 
MinJinLee
Noa nodded, not understanding why Uncle was crying.
''I have to finish, Noa, so you run home. Okay?" Yoseb put on his
safety goggles and turned around.
Noa moved quickly toward the entrance. The sweet scent of biscuits
wafted out the door. The boy had never eaten one of those biscuits, never
having asked for one.
188 
5
Noa burst through the doors of the house, his head and heart pounding from the breathless run. Gulping in deep lungfuls of air, he told his
mother, "Uncle can't leave work."
Sunja nodded, having expected this. She was bathing Isak with a wet
towel.
Isak's eyes were closed but his chest rose and fell slightly, punctuated
now and then by a series of painful coughs. A light blanket covered his
long legs. Ridges of scar tissue furrowed diagonally across Isak's shoulders and discolored torso, making haphazard diamond-shaped intersections. Every time Isak coughed, his neck flushed red.
Noa approached his father quietly.
"No, no. Move back," Sunja said sternly. '"Appa is very sick. He has a bad
cold."
She pulled the blanket up to Isak's shoulders, though she wasn't nearly
finished with cleaning him. In spite of the strong soap and several changes
of basin water, his body emitted a sour stench; nits clung to his hair and
beard.
Isak had been alert for a few moments, his violent coughs waking him,
but now when he opened his eyes, he didn't say anything, and when he
looked at her, he didn't seem to recognize her.
Sunja changed the compress on Isak's feverish head. The nearest hospital was a long trolley ride away, and even if she could move him by
189 
Min Jin Lee
If all · ht wait wouldn't ensure that a doctor would see him. If herse , an -mg .
Id k h. · to the kimchi cart and wheel him to the trolley stop she cou tuc 1m m '
l Id 'bl get him into the car, but then what would she do with
s 1e cou poss1 Y
the cart itself? It wouldn't pass through the trolley door . Noa might be
able t.o push it back home, but then how would she get Isak from the stop
to the hospital without the cart? And what if the driver wouldn't let them
board? More than once, she'd witnessed the trolley driver asking a sick
woman or man to get off.
Noa sat by his father's legs to keep away from his coughing. He felt
an urge to pat his father's sharp knee bone-to touch him, to make sure
he was real. The boy pulled out his notebook from his satchel to do his
homework, keeping close watch on Isak's breathing .
"Noa, you have to put your shoes back on. Go to the drugstore and
ask Pharmacist Kong to come. Can you tell him that it's important-that
umma will pay him double?" Sunja decided that if the Korean pharmacist
wouldn't come, she'd ask Kyunghee to plead with the Japanese pharmacist to come by the house, though that was unlikely.
The boy got up and left without a murmur . She could hear him running
down the street in his even, rapid steps.
Sunja wrung out the hand towel she was using to bathe Isak above the
brass basin. Fresh welts from recent beatings and a number of older scars
covered his wide, bony back. She felt sick as she washed his dark and
bruised frame. There was no one as good as Isak. He 'd tried to understand her, to respect her feelings; he'd never once brought up her shame.
He'd comforted her patiently when she'd lost the pregnancies between
Noa and Mozasu. Finally, when she gave birth to their son , he'd been
~verjoyed, but she'd been too worried about how they'd survive with so
little money to feel his happiness. Now that he was back home to die,
what did money matter, anyway? She should've done more for him; she
~hould've tried to know him the way he had tried to know her; and now
it was over. Even with h · h d d · · s is gas e an emaciated frame, his beauty wa
remarkable He was th · f h h' k d · e opposite o er, really; where she was t 1c an
short, he was slender and long-limbed - even his torn-up feet were well
shaped. If her eyes were small and anxious , his were large and full of ac190 
PACIII NKO
ceptance. The basin water was now gray, and Suaja got up to change it
again. . . Isak woke up. He saw Sur~a wearmg fanner pants and walking away
from him. He called out to her, "'Yobo," but she didn't turn around. He felt
like he didn 't know how to raise his voice . It was as if his voice was dying
while his mind was alive.
--Yobot Isak mumbled, and he reached for her, but she was almost in
the kitchen already. He was in Yoseb 's house in Osaka. This had to be true
because he was, in fact, waking from a dream where he was a boy. In the
dream, Isak had been sitting on a low bough of the chestnut tree in his childhood garden; the scent of the chestnut blossoms still lingered in his nose. It
was like many of the dreams he'd had in prison where, while he dreamed,
he was aware that the dream itself wasn't real. In real life, he'd never been on
a tree. vVhen he was young, the family gardener would prop him below that
very tree to get some fresh air, but he'd never been strong enough to climb
it the way Yoseb could . The gardener used to call Yoseb ""Monkey." In the
dream, Isak was hugging the thick branches tightly, unable to break from
the embra ce of the dark green foliage, the clusters of white blossoms with
their dark pink hearts . From the house, cheerful voices of the women called
to him. He wanted to see his old nursemaid and his sister, though they had
died years ago; in the dream , they were laughing like girls.
"Yobo- ''
"Ult-mult ." She put down the washbasin at the threshold of the kitchen
and rushed back to him. '"Are you all right? Can I get you something?"
"'My wife," he said slowly. ""How have you been?" Isak felt drowsy and
uncertain , but relieved . Sm1ia's face was different than he remembered -a
little older, more weary. ""How you must've stn1ggled here. I am so sorry."
""Shhh-you must rest ," she said.
"Noa ." He said the boy's name like he remembered something good .
"Where is he? He was here before ."
"'He went to fetch the pharmacist."
'-LHe looks so healthy. And bright. " It was hard to get the words out, but
his mind felt clear suddenly, and he wanted to tell her the things he'd been
saving up for her.
191 
J
Min]inlee
"You 're working at a restaurant now? Are you cooking there?" Isak
began to cough and couldn't stop. Pindots of blood splattered on her
blouse, and she wiped his mouth with a towel.
When he tried to sit up, she placed her left hand beneath his head and
her right over his chest to calm him, fearful that he might hurt himself.
The coughs wracked his body. His skin felt hot even through the blankets.
"Please rest. Later. We can talk later."
He shook his head.
"No, no. 1-1 want to tell you something ."
Sunja rested her hands on her lap.
"My life wasn't important," he said, trying to read her eyes, so full of
anguish and exhaustion. He needed her to understand that he was thankful to her-for waiting for him, for taking care of the family. It humbled
him to think of her laboring and earning money for their family when he
wasn't able to support them. Money must've been very hard with him
gone and with inflation from the war. The prison guards had complained
incessantly of the prices of things-no one had enough to eat, they said.
Quit complaining about the bugs in the gruel. Isak had prayed constantly
for his family's provision. "I brought you here and made your life more
difficult."
She smiled at him, not knowing how to say-you saved me. Instead, she
said, "You must get well." Sunja covered him with a thicker blanket; his
body was burning hot, but he shivered. "For the boys, please get well."
How can I raise them without you?
"Mozasu-where is he?"
"At the restaurant with Sister. Our boss lets him stay there while we
work."
Isak looked alert and attentive, as if all his pain had vanished; he wanted
to know more about his boys.
"Mozasu," Isak said, smiling . "Mozasu. He saved his people from slav1 · es ery-" Isak's head throbbed so intensely that he had to close us ey
again. He wanted to see his two sons grow up, finish school, and get
married. Isak had never wanted to live so much, and now, just when he
d" "l have wanted to live until he was very old, he'd been sent home to ie.
192 
PACHINKO
Ons" he said. ''I have two sons. Noa and Mozasu. May the Lord
tWO S '
bless my sons. "
Sunja watched him carefully. His face looked strange, yet peaceful. Not
knowing what else to do , she kept talking.
·•Mozasu is becoming a big boy-always happy and friendly. He has a
wonderful laugh. He runs everywhere. So fast!" She pumped her arms to
imitate the toddler's running , and she found herself laughing, and he
laughed, too. It occurred to her then that there was only one other person
in the world who'd want to hear about Mozasu growing up so well, and
until now, she'd forgotten that she could express a prideful joy in her boys.
Even when her brother- and sister-in-law were pleased with the children ,
she couldn't ignore their sadness at their lack; sometimes, she wanted to
bide her delight from them for fear that it could be seen as a kind of boasting.
Back home, having two healthy and good sons was tantamount to having
vast riches. She had no home , no money, but she had Noa and Mozasu.
Isak's eyes opened , and he looked at the ceiling. ''I can't go until I see
them, Lord. Until I see my children to bless them. Lord, let me not go- "
Sm~a bowed her head , and she prayed , too.
Isak closed his eyes again, his shoulders twitching in pain.
Sm~a placed her right hand on his chest to check his faint breathing.
The door opened , and as expected , Noa had returned home alone. The
pharmacist couldn't come now but promised to come later tonight. The
boy returned to his spot by Isak's feet and did his sums while his father
slept. Noa wanted to show Isak his schoolwork; even Hoshii-sensei, the
hardest teacher in his grade, told Noa that he was good at writing his letters and that he should work hard to improve his illiterate race: "One
industrious Korean can inspire ten thousand to reject their lazy nature! "
Isak continued to sleep, and Noa concentrated on his work.
Later, when Kyunghe e arrived home with Mozasu, the house felt lively
for the first time since Isak's arrest. Isak woke briefly to see Mozasu , who
didn't cry at the sight of the skeletal man. Mozasu called hin1 "'Papa " and
patted his face with both hands , the way he did when he liked someone .
With his white , chubby hands , Mozasu made little pats on Isak's sunken
193 
MinJinLee
k Th t ddler sat still in front of him briefly, but as soon as Isak chee s. e 0
d h. Kyunghee removed him, not wanting the baby to get sick. close 1s eyes,
When Yoseb returned home, the house grew somber again, because
Yoseb wouldn't ignore the obvious.
"How could they?" Yoseb said, staring hard at Isak's body.
"M boy, couldn't you just tell them what they wanted to hear?
y 'f . . Couldn't you just say you worshipped the Emperor even I It Isn't true?
Don't you know that the most important thing is to stay alive?"
Isak opened his eyes but said nothing and closed his eyes again. His
eyelids felt so heavy that it was painful to keep them open. He wanted to
speak with Yoseb, but the words would not come out.
Kyunghee brought her husband a pair of scissors, a long razor blade, a
cup of oil, and a basin of vinegar.
"The nits and lice won't die. He should be shaved . It must be so itchy
for him," she said, her eyes wet.
Grateful to his wife for giving him something to do, Yoseb rolled up his
sleeves, then poured the cup of oil over Isak's head, massaging it into his
scalp.
"Isak-ah, don't move," Yoseb said, trying to keep his voice normal.
"I'm going to get rid of all these itchy bastards."
Yoseb made clean strokes across Isak's head and threw the cut hair into
the metal basin .
"Yah-Isak-ah." Yoseb smiled at the memory. "You remember how the
gardener used to cut our hair when we were kids? I used to holler like
a crazy animal but you never did . You sat there like a baby monk , calm
and peaceful, and you never once complained." Yoseb grew quiet , wanting what he saw in front of him not to be true. "Isak-ah , why did 1 bring
you to this hell? I was so lonesome for you . I was wrong, you know, to
b~ng you here, and now I'm punished for my selfishness .'' Yoseb re5ted
his blade in the basin .
"I will not be all right if you die . Do you understand ? You cannot die,
my boy. Isak-ah, please don't die . How can I go on ? W hat >vvill I tell our
parents?"
Isak continued to sleep obl' · l · t· ·1 · 1· l · · ll.,t , 1v10us to 11s anu y enc1rc mg ns p. l .. •
194 
PACHINKO
Yoseb wiped his eyes and shut his mouth clampi'ng do l .· • , wn on us Jaws.
He picked up the b~ade again, working steadily to take off the bits of gray
hair remaining on his head . When Isak's head was smooth, Yoseb poured
oil over his brother's beard.
For the remainder of the evening, Yoseb, Kyunghee, and Sunja rid him
of nits and lice, dropping the bugs into jars of kerosene, only stopping to
put the boys to bed. Later, the pharmacist came to tell them what they already knew. There was nothing a hospital or a doctor could do for Isak
now.
At dawn, Yoseb returned to work. Sunja remained with Isak, and
Kyunghee went to the restaurant . Yoseb didn't bother complaining about
Kyunghee going to work alone. He was too tired to argue, and the wages
were badly needed. Outside the house, the street was filled with the morning bustling of men and women heading to work and children running to
school. Isak slept in the front room, his breathing fast and shallow. He was
clean and smooth like an infant-all the hair from his body shaved.
After Noa finished breakfast, he laid down his chopsticks neatly and
looked up at his mother.
"Umma, may I stay home?" he asked, never having dared to ask for
such a thing, even when things were awful at school.
Surtja looked up from her sewing, surprised.
"Are you feeling ill?"
He shook his head.
Isak, who was half-awake, had heard the boy's request.
"Noa-"
"Yes, appa."
"U mma told me that you 're b ecommg a ne sc o ar. · fi h l "
The child beamed but, out of habit, looked down at his feet.
When Noa received high marks in school, he thought first of his fa~er.
Yoseb had told the boy several times that his father had been a prodigy,
having taught himself Korean, Classical Chinese, and Japanese from
bo ks · . · h t t seminary Isak had al- o With scant tutormg. By the time e wen ° - '
ready read the Bible several times.
195 
Min Jin Lee
1 i:. 1 d'ffi lt knowing that his father was a learned man When schoo 1e t 1 cu ,
had strengthened the boy's resolve to learn.
"Noa."
''Yes, appa?''
''You must go to school today. When I was a boy, I wanted to go to
school with the other children very much."
The boy nodded, having heard this detail about his father before.
"What else can we do but persevere, my child? We're meant to increase
our talents. The thing that would make your appa happy is if you do as
well as you've been doing. Wherever you go, you represent our family, and
you must be an excellent person-at school, in town, and in the world. No
matter what anyone says. Or does," Isak said, then paused to cough. He
knew it must be taxing for the child to go to a Japanese school.
"You must be a diligent person with a humble heart. Have compassion
for everyone. Even your enemies. Do you understand that, Noa? Men
may be unfair, but the Lord is fair. You'll see. You will," Isak said, his exhausted voice tapering off.
"Yes, appa." Hoshii-sensei had told him that he had a duty to Koreans,
too; one day, he would serve his community and make Koreans good children of the benevolent Emperor. The boy stared at his father's newly
shaved head. His bald pate was so white in contrast to his dark, sunken
cheeks. He looked both new and ancient.
Sunja felt bad for the child; he'd never had a day with both his parents
and no one else. When she was growing up, even when there were others
around, it had been just the three of them-her father, mother, and heran invisible triangle. When she thought back to her life at home, this
closeness was what she missed. Isak was right about school, but it
wouldn't be much longer. Soon, Isak would be gone. She would have
given anything to see her father again, but how could she go against Isak's
wishes? Sunja picked up Noa's satchel and handed it to the boy, who was
crestfallen.
"After school, come home straight away, Noa. We'll be here," Isak said.
Noa remained fixed to his spot on the floor, unable to take his eyes off
his father for fear that he'd disappear. The child hadn't realized how much
196 
PACHINKO
he'd missed his father until he returned . The ache of missing him had surfaced in his small, concave chest, and he felt anxious about the pain that
was sure to return . If he remained home, Noa felt certain that his father
would be okay. They wouldn't even have to talk. Why couldn't he study
at home the way his father had? Noa wanted to ask this, but it was not in
his nature to argue .
Isak, however, didn't want Noa to see him like this anymore . The boy
was already afraid, and there was no need to make him suffer any more
than he already had . There were many things he hadn't told the child yet
about life, about learning, about how to talk to God .
"ls it very hard at school?" Isak asked .
Sunja turned to look at the boy's face; she 'd never thought to ask him
this.
Noa shrugged. The work was okay, not impossible . The good students, who were all Japanese, the ones he admired, wouldn 't speak to
him. They woul<ln 't even look at him. He believed that he could enjoy going to school if he were a regular person and not a Korean . He couldn't
say this to his father or to anyone else, because it was certain he'd never
be a regular Japanese . One day, Uncle Yoseb said, they would return to
Korea; Noa imagined that life would be better there.
Carrying his book bag and bento, Noa lingered by the front door , memorizing his father's kindly face.
"Child , come here ," Isak said .
Noa approached him and sat on bended knees. Please God, please.
Please make my fath er well. I'll ask th£s just once more. Please. Noa shut his
eyes tightly.
Isak took Noa 's hand and held it.
"You are very brave, Noa . Much, much braver than me. Living every
day in the presence of those who refose to acknowledge your humanity
takes great courage."
Noa chewed on his lower lip and didn 't say anything . He wiped his
nose with his hand .
"My child," he said, and Isak let go of his sou's hand. ""My dear boy. !\ly
blessing."
197 
Tokyo, 1960
I t took some time, but after two years at Waseda, Noa finally felt comfortable about his place there. Always an excellent student with good habits,
after a few hiccups and several thoughtful attempts , Noa learned how to
write English literature papers and take university-level exams. University
life was glorious in contrast to secondary school, where he had learned
and memorized many things he no longer valued. None of his requirements even seemed like work; Waseda was pure joy to him. He read as
much as he could without straining his eyes, and there was time to read
and write and think. His professors at Waseda cared deeply about the subjects they taught, and Noa could not understand how anyone could ever
complain.
Hansu had procured for him a well-appointed apartment and gave
him a generous allowance, so Noa did not have to worry about housing ,
money, or food. He lived simply and managed to send some money home
each month. 'Just study," Hansu had said. ''Learn everything. Fill your
mind with knowledge-it's the only kind of power no one can take away
from you." Hansu never told him to study, but rather to learn, and it
occurred to Noa that there was a marked difference. Learning was like
playing, not labor.
Noa was able to buy every book he needed for his classes, and when he
couldn't find one at the bookstore , all he had to do was go to the im.mense
university library, which was deeply underutilized by his peers. He didn 't
279 
Min Jin Lee
t dents around him, because they seemed so
understand the Japanese s u . . d · th· gs outside of school rather than learrung. He much more mtereste m m . ,
h fr hools past that the Japanese didn t want much knew well enoug om sc . . N kept to himself, no different than when he was
to do with Koreans, so oa . Koreans at Waseda, but he av01ded them, too
a boy. There were some . . '
h d t O political. Durmg one of their monthly lunches, because t ey seeme o . ,, .
Hansu had said that the leftists were "a bunch of whiners and the nght-
. " 1 · t 'd" Noa was alone mostly, but he didn't feel lonely. 1sts were p am s upi .
Even after two years, he was still in thrall with just being at Waseda, with
just having a quiet room to read in. Like a man starved, Noa filled his
mind, ravenous for good books. He read through Dickens, Thackeray,
Hardy, Austen, and Trollope, then moved on to the Continent to read
through much of Balzac, Zola, and Flaubert, then fell in love with Tolstoy.
His favorite was Goethe; he must have read The Sorrows of Young Werther
at least half a dozen times.
If he had an embarrassing wish, it was this: He would be a European
from a long time ago. He didn't want to be a king or a general - he was
too old for such simple wishes. If anything, he wanted a very simple life
filled with nature, books, and perhaps a few children. He knew that later
in life, he also wanted to be let alone to read and to be quiet. In his new
life in Tokyo, he had discovered jazz music, and he liked going to bars by
himself and listening to records that the owners would select from bins.
Listening to live music was too expensive, but he hoped that one day,
when he had a job again, he would be able to go to ajazz club. At the bar,
he would have one drink that he'd barely touch to pay for his seat, then
he'd go back to his room, read some more, write letters to his family, then
go to sleep.
Every few weeks, he saved some of his allowance and took an inexpensive train ride home and visited his family. At the beginning of each
month, Hansu took him for a sushi lunch to remind Noa of his mission in
the world for some highe h · · full H · r purpose t at neither could artlculate Y· 15
life felt ideal, and Noa was grateful.
That morning as he walk d · El' · 1· - ' e across campus to h1s Georg e 10t sem
nar, he heard someone calling his name.
280 
PACHINKO
"Bando-san, Bando-san, " a woman shouted. It was th d' alb . e ra 1c eauty on
Pus Akiko Fumeki . cam ,
Noa stopped and waited. She had never spoken to hi'm b c H e10re. ewas
in fact, a little afraid of her. She was always saying contrary things to Pro~
fessor Kuroda, a soft-spoken woman who had grown up and studied in
England. Though the professor was polite, Noa could tell that she didn't
like Akiko much ; the other students, especially the females, could barely
tolerate her. Noa knew it was safer to keep his distance from the students
that the professors disliked . In the seminar room, Noa sat one seat away
from the professor , while Akiko sat in the very back of the room below the
high windows.
"Ah, Bando-san , how are you?" Akiko asked, flushed and out of
breath. She spoke to him casually, as if they had talked many times before.
"Well, thank you . How are you?"
"So what do you think of Eliot's final masterpiece? " she asked.
"It's excellent. Everything by George Eliot is perfect."
"Nonsense . Adam Bede is a bore. I almost died reading that thing. Silas
Marner is barely tolerable. "
"Well, Adam Bede was not as exciting or developed as Middlemarch,
but it remains a wonderful depiction of a brave woman and an honest
man-"
"Oh, please ." Akiko rolled her eyes, and she laughed at him.
Noa laughed , too . He knew she was a Sociology major, because everyone had had to introduce himself or herself on the first day of class.
"You have read everything by George Eliot? That 's impressive," he
said, never having met anyone else who had done so.
"You're the one who's read absolutely everything . It's sickening, and
I'm almost irritated at you for doing so. But I admire it, too. Although, if
you like everything you read , I can't take you that seriously. Perhaps you
didn't think about these books long enough." She said this with a serious
face, not in the least bit concerned about offending him.
"Soo nee." Noa smiled. It had not occurred to him that any book that a professor would choose and admire could be inferior even in relation to that author's own works. Their professor had loved Adam Bede and Silas Marner.
28 1 
MinJinLee
. 1 t the professor. I think she's in love with you." "You sit so c ose 0
In shock Noa halted.
d ' • · ty years old. Maybe seventy." Noa moved toward the ''Kuro a-san 1s six
building door and opened it for her. . . '
"You think women want to stop havmg sex Just because they re sixty?
,, , ab d She's probably the most romantic woman in Waseda
1 ou re sur . ·
She's read far too many novels. You're perfect for her. She'd marry you
tomorrow. Oh, the scandal! Your George Eliot married a young man, too,
you know. Although her groom did try to kill himself on their honeymoon!" Akiko laughed out loud, and the students who were walking up
the staircase to their classroom stared at her. Everyone seemed puzzled by
their interaction, since Noa was almost as famous as the campus beauty,
but for being aloof.
Once in their classroom, she sat at her old seat in the back, and Noa
returned to his seat by the professor. He opened his notebook and retrieved his fountain pen, then looked down at the sheet of white paper
lined in pale blue ink. He was thinking about Akiko; she was even prettier
up close.
Kuroda-san sat down to give her lecture. She wore a pea-green sweater
over her Peter Pan-collar white blouse and a brown tweed skirt. Her tiny
feet were shod with a childish pair of Mary Janes. She was so small and
thin that she gave the impression that she could almost fly away like a
sheet of paper or a dry leaf.
Kuroda-san's lecture was primarily an extensive psychological portrait
of the heroine in Daniel Deronda, the self-centered Gwendolen Harleth,
who changes as a result of her suffering and the goodness of Daniel. The
professor put great emphasis on a woman's lot being determined by her
economic position and marriage prospects. Unsurprisingly, the professor compared Gwendolen to the vain and greedy Rosamond Viney of
Middkmarch, but argued that in contrast, Gwendolen achieves the Aristotelian anagnorisis and peripeteia. Kuroda-san spent most of the lecture
on Gwend01en, then right before the period ended, she spoke a little
about Mirah and Daniel, the Jews of the book. Kuroda-san gave some
background on Zionism and the role of Jews in Victorian novels.
282 
PACHINKO
. I men are often seen as exceptionally brilliant, and the women
·4jeWIS l . . .
c. beautiful and tragic. Here we have a s1tuat10n where a man does
o1ten '
are his own identity as an outsider. He is like Moses, the infant in
uot know h . J . h d E . . who learns that e 1s ewis an not gyptian-" As Kuroda-san Genesis . · ng this she glanced at Noa, but he was not aware of 1t, because he
was say1 '
taking notes. was ''Hmvever, when Daniel learns that he is indeed a Jew, Daniel is free
to love the virtuous Mirah , another talented singer like his Jewish mother,
and they will go east to Israel." Kuroda-san sighed quietly, as if she was
leased by Eliot's ending .
p "So are you saying that it is better for people to only love within their
race, that people like the Jews need to live apart in their own country?"
Akiko asked, without raising her hand. She did not seem to believe in that
fonnality.
"Well, I think George Eliot is arguing that there is great nobility in being Jewish and wanting to be part of a Jewish state. Eliot recognizes that
these people were often persecuted unfairly. They have every right to a
Jewish state. The war has taught us that bad things happened to them,
and that can't happen again. The Jews have done no wrong, but the Europeans- " Kuroda-san spoke more quietly than usual, as if she was afraid
that someone might ove-..~1ear her and she would get in trouble. "It's complicated, but Eliot was far ahead of her contemporaries to think about the
issue of discrimination based on religion . Nee?"
There were nine students in the class, and everyone nodded, including
Noa, but Akiko looked irritated nonetheless.
4
'Japan was an ally of Germany," Akiko said.
"That is not part of this discussion, Akiko-san ."
. The professor opened her book nervously, wanting to change the subject.
'
4
Eliot is wrong," Akiko said, undeterred. "Maybe the Jews have a right
to have their own state but I see no need for Mirah and Daniel to have to
l '
eave England. I think this nobility argument or a greater nation for a persecuted p I . d c . " eop e 1s a pretext to eject all the unwante 1ore1gners.
Noa did not look up . He found himself writing down everything Akiko
283 
Min Jin Lee
said, because it upset him to think that this could be true. He had admired
Daniel's courage and goodness throughout the book, and he had not
thought much about Eliot's political design. Was it possible that Eliot
was suggesting that foreigners, no matter how much she admired them,
should leave England? At this point in the course, everyone in the room
despised Akiko, but suddenly he admired her courage to think so differently and to suggest such a difficult truth. He felt lucky to he at a university
and not in most other settings, where the person in charge was always
right. Nevertheless, until he really listened to Akiko disagree with the professor, he had not thought for himself fully, and it had never occurred to
him to disagree in public.
After class, he walked home alone, deep in thoughts of her, and he
knew that he wanted to be with her, even if it would not be easy. The
following Tuesday, before the seminar began, Noa went early to class to
claim the chair next to hers. The professor tried not to show that she was
hurt by this defection, but of course, she was.
284 
HooK fJr
Pachinko 
I propose the following definition of the nation: it is
an imagined political community-and imagined as
both inherently limited and sovereign.
It is imagi,ned because the members of even the
smallest nation will never know most of their fellowmembers, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in
the minds of each lives the image of their commumon ...
The nation is imagined as limited because even
the largest of them, encompassing perhaps a billion
living human beings, has finite, if elastic, boundaries, beyond which lie other nations ...
It is imagined as sovereign because the concept
was born in an age in which Enlightenment and
Revolution were destroying the legitimacy of the
divinely-ordained, hierarchical dynastic realm ...
Finally, it is imagined as a community, because,
regardless of the actual inequality and exploitation
that may prevail in each, the nation is always conceived as a deep, horizontal comradeship. Ultimately it is this fraternity that makes it possible,
over the past two centuries, for so many millions of
people, not so much to kill, as willingly die for such
limited imaginings .
- Benedict Anderson 
PACHINKO
"Papa, it doesn't matter. None of it matters nee?" Solom h d , . on a never
seen his father like this before.
"I worked and made money because I thought it would make me a
man. I thought people would respect me if I was rich."
Solomon looked at him and nodded. His father rarely spent on himself,
but he had paid for weddings and funerals for employees and sent tuition
for their children.
Mozasu's face brightened suddenly.
"You can change your mind, Solomon. You can call Phoebe when she
gets home and say you're sorry. Your mother was a lot like Phoebestrong-willed and smart."
"I want to live here," Solomon said. "She will not."
''Soo nee."
Solomon picked up the ledger from his father's table.
"Explain this to me, Papa."
Mozasu paused, then he opened the book.
It was the first of the month, and Sunja had woken up upset. She had
dreamed of Hansu again. Lately, he had been appearing in her dreams,
looking the way he did when she was a girl, wearing his white linen suit
and white leather shoes. He always said the same thing: "You are my girl;
you are my dear girl." Sunja would wake and feel ashamed. She should
have forgotten him by now.
After breakfast, she would go the cemetery to clean Isak's grave. As
usual, Kyunghee offered to come with her, but Sunja said it was okay.
Neither woman performed the jesa. As Christians, they weren't supposed to believe in ancestor worship. Nevertheless, both widows still
wanted to talk to their husband and elders, appeal to them, seek their
counsel. They missed their old rituals, so she went to the cemetery regularly. It was curious, but Sunja felt close to Isak in a way that she hadn't
when he was alive. Then she had been in awe of him and his goodness.
Dead, he seemed more approachable to her.
When the train from Yokohama reached Osaka Station, Smtja bought
ivory-colored chrysanthemums from the old Korean woman's stall. She had
481
[BEGIN READING BELOW]
• 
Min.Jin Lee
tl c ears The way Isak had explained it, when it was time to been 1ere 1or Y ·
be wiili tlie Lord, your real body would be in heaven, so what happened
mains didn't matter It made no sense to bring a buried body fa- w ~m re . · . .
vorite foods or incense or flowers. There was no need for bowmg, smce we
were all equal in ilie eyes ofilie Lord, he 'd said . And yet Su~ja couldn't help
wanting to bring something lovely to the grave. In life, he had asked for so
little from her, and when she iliought of him now, she remembered her husband as someone who had praised ilie beauty that God had made .
She was glad iliat Isak had not been cremated . She had wanted a place for
ilie boys to visit ilieir failier. Mozasu visited ilie grave often, and before Noa
disappeared, he had come wiili her, too. Had they talked to him, too? she wondered. It had never occurred to her to ask iliem this, and now it was too late.
Lately, every time she went to the cemetery, she wondered what Isak
would have thought of Noa's death . Isak would have understood Noa's
suffering. He would have known what to say to him . Noa had been cremated by his wife, so there was no grave to visit. Sunja talked to Noa when
she was alone. Sometimes, something very simple like a delicious piece
of pumpkin taffy would make her sorry that now that she had money,
she couldn't buy him something that he had loved as a child. Sorry, Noa,
sorry. It had been eleven years since he'd died; the pain didn't go away,
but its sharp edge had dulled and softened like sea glass.
Sunja hadn 't gone to Noa's funeral. He hadn't wanted his wife and children to know about her, and she had done enough already. If she hadn't
visited him the way she had, maybe he might still be alive. Hansu had not
gone to the funeral, either. Noa would've been fifty-six years old.
In her dream last night, Suaja had been happy that Hansu had come to
see her again. They met at the beach near her old home in Yeongdo to talk,
and recalling the dream was like watching another person's life. How was it
possible that Isak and Noa were gone but Hansu was still alive? How was
this fai ';> H 1· · r. ansu was 1vmg somewhere in Tokyo in a hospital bed under the
watchful gaze of round-the-dock nurses and his daughters . She never saw
him anymore and had no wish to. In her dreams, he was as vibrant as he had
been when she was a m 1 It H h · k o·r • was not ansu t at she missed or even Isa •
What she was seeing a · · h d ' · · d gam m er reams was her youth , her begmrung, an
482 
PACHINKO
• shes-so this was how she became a woman. Without Hansu and Isak herWI
ld ' h b th' ·1 ·
and Noa, there wou n t ave een 1s p1 gnmage to this land. Beyond the
dailiness, there had been moments of shimmering beauty and some glory,
too, even in this ajumma's life. Even if no one knew, it was true.
There was consolation: The people you loved, they were always there
with you, she had learned. Sometimes, she could be in front of a train
kiosk or the window of a bookstore, and she could feel Noa's small hand
when he was a boy, and she would close her eyes and think of his sweet,
grassy smell and remember that he had always tried his best. At those moments, it was good to be alone to hold on to him.
She took the taxi from the train station to the cemetery, then walked the
many rows to Isak's well-maintained grave. There was no need to clean
anything, but she liked to wipe down the marble tombstone before she
spoke to him. Sunja fell to her knees and cleaned the flat, square tombstone with the towels she'd brought for the purpose. Isak's name was
carved injapanese and Korean. 1907-1944. The white marble was clean
now and warm from the sun.
He had been such an elegant and beautiful man. Suaja could recall how
the servant girls back home had admired him; Bokhee and Dokhee had
never seen such a handsome man before. Mozasu took after her more and
had her plain face, but he had his father's straight carriage and steady stride.
''Yobo," she said, "Mozasu is well. Last week, he called me, because
Solomon lost his job with that foreign bank, and now he wants to work
with his father. Imagine that? I wonder what you'd make of this."
The silence encouraged her.
"I wonder how you are-" She stopped speaking when she saw Uchidasan, the groundskeeper. Sunja was sitting on the ground in her black woolen
pants suit. She glanced at her handbag on the ground. It was an expensive
designer bag that Etsuko had bought for her seventieth birthday.
The groundskeeper stopped before her and bowed, and she returned
the bow.
Suaja smiled at the polite young man, who must have been about forty
or forty-five. Uchida-san looked younger than Mozasu. How did she look
to him? Her skin was deeply grooved from the years of sun, and her short
483 
Min Jin Lee
hair was bright white. No matter-seventy-three did not feel very old to
her. Had the groundskeeper heard her mumbling in Korean? Ever since
she'd stopped working at the confectionery, her limitedJapanese had deteriorated further. It was not terrible, but lately she felt shy around native
speakers. Uchida-san picked up his rake and walked away.
Sunja put both hands on the white marble, as if she could touch Isak
from where she was.
"I wish you could tell me what will happen to us. I wish. I wish I knew
that Noa was with you."
Several rows from her, the groundskeeper cleared wet leaves from stone
markers. Now and then he would glance up at her, and Sunja felt embarrassed
to be seen talking to a grave. She wanted to stay a little longer. Wanting to look
like she was busy, Sunja opened her canvas bag to put away the dirty towels. In the bottom of her bag, she found her house keys on the key ring with
thumbnail-sized photographs ofN oa and Mozasu in a sealed acrylic frame.
Sunja started to weep, and she could not help her crying .
"Boku-san."
"Hai?" Sunja looked up at the groundskeeper.
''May I get you something to drink? I have a thermos of tea in the cottage. It is not very fine tea, but it is warm."
"No, no. Thank you. All time, you see people cry," she said in broken
Japanese.
"No, actually, very few people come here, but your family visits regularly. You have two sons and a grandson, Solomon. Mozasu-sama visits
every month or two. I haven't seen Noa-sama in eleven years, but he used
to come on the last Thursday of each month. You could set a watch to
him. How is Noa-sama? He was a very kind man."
"Noa come here? Come before 1978?"
"Hai."
. "From 1963 to 1978?" She mentioned the years he would have been
m N~gan~. She said the dates again, hoping that her Japanese was correct.
SunJa pomted to Noa's photograph on the key ring. "He visit her e?"
The gr~undskeeper nodded with conviction at the photog raph , then
looked up m the sky like he wast · · · ·
rymg to see some sort of calendar m his nund .
4R4 
PACHINKO
"Hai, hai. He came in those years and before to N ' o. oa-sama told me
to go to school and even offered to send me if I wished."
"Really?''
"Yes, but I told him I have an empty gourd for a head, and that it would
have been pointless to send me to school Besides I like it he It' · · , re. s qmet.
Everybody who comes to visit is very kind. He asked me never to mention
his visits, but I have not seen him in over a decade, and I'd wondered ifhe
moved away to England . He told me to read good books and brought me
translations of the great British author Charles Dickens."
"Noa, my son , is dead. "
The groundskeeper opened his mouth slightly.
"My son , my son, " Sunja said quietly.
"I am very sad to hear that, Boku-san. Truly, I am," the groundskeeper
said, looking forlorn. "I'd been hoping to tell him that after I finished all
the books he 'd brought me, I bought more of my own. I have read through
all of Mr. Dickens 's books in translations, but my favorite is the first one
he gave me , David Copperfield. I admire David."
"Noa loved to read. The best. He loved to read."
"Have you read Mr. Dickens? "
"I don 't know how," she said. "To read."
"Maji? If you are Noa's mother, you are very smart, too. Perhaps you
can go to night school for adults. That is what Noa-sama told me to do."
Sunja smiled at the groundskeeper, who seemed hopeful about sending
an old woman to school. She remembered Noa cajoling Mozasu to persevere with his studies.
The groundskeeper looked at his rake. He bowed deeply, then excused
himself to return to his tasks.
When he was out of sight, Sunja dug a hole at the base of the tombstone
about a foot deep with her hands and dropped the key ring photograph inside. She covered the hole with dirt and grass, then did what she could to
clean her hands with her handkerchief , but dirt remained beneath her nails.
Sunja tamped down the earth, then brushed the grass with her fingers.
She picked up her bags. Kyunghee would be waiting for her at home.
485
[END OF NOVEL]
